## Introduction
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

## Project Description
In this project, we have build an ETL pipeline that extracts data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights into what songs their users are listening to. To complete the project, you will need to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift and execute SQL statements that create the analytics tables from these staging tables.
  
## Project Data

* **Song Dataset**: The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. <br>For example, here are file paths to two files in this dataset.
  
```
    song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
    song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

*  **Log Dataset**: The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.
The log files in the dataset are partitioned by year and month. <br>For example, here are file paths to two files in this dataset.

```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

*  **Log Json Meta Information**: Contains the meta information that is required by AWS to correctly load the Log Dataset

## Project requirements
Using the song and event datasets, create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis including the following tables.
#### Fact Table
1. **songplays**: records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page `NextSong`
     * *songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent*
#### Dimension Tables
1. **users**: users in the app
     * *user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level*
2. **songs**: songs in music database
    * *song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration*
3. **artists**: artists in music database
    * *artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude*
4. **time**: timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
    * *start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday*

## Project Environment
In order to complete this project, you'll need to use these tools:
* Access to AWS Console.
* Python
* Vs Code

## Project files
1. `create_table.py`: In this file we connect to the database, drop tables if they already exist and create the fact and dimension tables for the star schema in Redshift. This way, we can run create_tables.py whenever you want to reset your database and test your ETL pipeline.
2. `etl.py`: This is where we load data from S3 into staging tables on Redshift and then process that data into your analytics tables on Redshift.
3. `sql_queries.py`: This is where you'll define you SQL statements, which will be imported into the two other files above.
4. `README.md`: This is where you'll provide discussion on your process and decisions for this ETL pipeline.
5. `dwh.cfg`: This is where we add redshift database and IAM role info for connection.

## How to run this project on your local machine
To be able to run this project on your local machine, make sure your Redshift already configured and ready to access. You will also need to install `psycopg2`.

1. Create the tables by running the following command:
   ```
   $ python create_tables.py
   ```
2. Execute the ETL process by running the following command:
   ```
   $ python etl.py
   ```
By following this steps you will run an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for the analytics team to continue finding insights into what songs their users are listening to.
